senator Church is the only politician in
Washington right now outside the realm
of total fantasy of whom when I asked
myself can you imagine this person as
president the answer comes back yeah
he's such an obvious choice for the
Democratic nomination that even his
refusal to say he's interested sounds
encouraging to many who like him and
many do like him
he's charmingly humorous why would be a
better word for instance when asked how
a secret CIA supply of cobra venom might
be put into use he deadpanned
well the Cobra injects it directly
through the fangs how the CIA was
planning to use it I can't say his
positions on international policy
questions have been solidly Liberal
Democratic he was against the
government's role in the Vietnam War
even before that opposition became a
liberal must as head of the Foreign
Relations Subcommittee on multinational
corporations he exposed the
international oil cartel of the seven
sister oil companies and threatened to
throw them into the murky waters of free
enterprise at a time when most of the
rest of the government was blaming
everything on the a Rabb's and looking
to the oil companies for help
Church is cautious but not rhetorical
since the creation of the Senate Select
Committee on Intelligence and his
appointment as its chair he seemed
almost a study in restrained outrage
righteously indignant over the violation
of the country's founding principles and
solemn treaty commitments his words are
slow to come out but they have a
precision reminiscent of representative
Barbara Jordans opening statement at the
House Judiciary Committee's impeachment
proceedings last year church seems
almost a man with a mission
decent noble upright trustworthy polite
serious with wit in place of Elliot
Richardson serious on top of serious if
he had been Attorney General when Nixon
ordered that the special prosecutor be
fired Church would probably have said
not only that he had done what he had to
do but that high government officials
have to set an example for others his
hair has grayed the presidential
candidate perfection during the course
of the select committee investigation so
he looks not only boyish but
distinguished he looks good with the
heavy blue
curtain and an American flag behind them
he won't say if he wants to run for
president until after the Select
Committee has finished its work
presumably because he won't open his
principal positions to accusations of
platform building or vote seeking of
course whether or not he does want to be
President
his current assignment is making him
famous and people will remember later
what he says now and he could say no
he's not interested so people could not
interpret his des mural as yes but then
again if he said no people might think
he'd found out such horrible things
about the CIA and other federal
intelligence agencies that he'd never
put himself in the position of having
responsibility for the actions of those
rogue elephants which have been known to
act in direct contravention to the
president's orders or maybe he knows
something we don't about the
assassination of President John Kennedy
and wouldn't want that to happen to him
so maybe it's really in the best
interest of the country did he not say
if he wants to be President senator
Church is right again but what's his
domestic policy a president has to have
a domestic policy well senator Church
may not be a declared candidate for the
Democratic presidential nomination but
he gave a speech at the Women's National
Democratic Club September 8 1975 that
sure sounded like a candidates speech
the Women's National Democratic Club is
a Democratic Party organization senator
Church spoke on law and order
not exactly a liberal topic he said we
can't expect the people to obey the law
when government agencies and officials
don't and he said he expects the people
and the government agencies and
government officials and corporations to
obey the law
because otherwise there'll be anarchy
there's already trouble look at the
crime statistics he said senator Church
did not talk about social causes of
crime he talked about lack of examples
about how we all have to obey the law
together this is a man I think who would
insist on waiting to by a token even if
the token seller were asleep and no one
else was around I'm happy to have your
assurance but none of these microphones
is hooked into mr. Colby's office
my own my only rejoinder is that what
you say I'm happy to be back again
you've been so gracious to me in the
past when I came here several years ago
to express my descent on the war in
Vietnam and again last year to discuss
the big oil companies and now again to
talk about a subject that may be even
more vital to the the longevity of
freedom in America but before I do that
Marlene since you were kind enough to
refer to my 18 years in Washington I'd
like to introduce gracious lady who
threw most of those years was my
administrative assistant and many of you
know her she's here today in the
audience and I'd like her to stand and
for you to recognize mrs. Berta bar
[Applause]
burner Barnes brought all of the girls
from the office and that means that the
men are left to run the shop and that as
you know is an invitation to chaos chaos
as a matter of fact has something to do
with the subject I want to discuss today
a speech that I have entitled Americans
and the law
last week's attempt on the life of
President Ford should serve to remind us
once again that violence lurks at every
corner hides in every crowd and haunts
every neighborhood in America today
violence is the most ubiquitous symptom
of a disease spreading through our
society an epidemic of lawlessness which
unless checked in time could prove fatal
to democracy itself the lawlessness of
which I see extends far beyond crime in
the street though here may be the
appropriate place to begin the
discussion for the growth of common
crime now looms too large either to be
denied or ignored
the statistics are irrebuttable crime in
the last calendar year increased 17% the
most rapid rise in the 44 years such
records have been kept violent crime
that relentless guerrilla war against
law-abiding citizen grew worse and worse
murder was up last year by five percent
forcible rape by nine aggravated assault
by nine and armed robbery by 14 percent
the long-term pattern is startling
during the last decade and a half murder
has risen by two hundred and six percent
forcible raped by a hundred and forty
three percent aggravated assault by a
hundred fifty-three percent and robbery
by a staggering two hundred and fifty
five percent nor is there any longer
room for the smug belief that crime is
confined to the city rural and suburban
areas are catching up fast
last year the smallest increase in crime
a hefty 13 percent with in large cities
the highest increase 21% was in rural
area and the next highest 20 percent in
the suburbs
street crime which was once most venison
and metropolitan centers now stalks the
nation at large
apparently the fear of detection and the
rest is scat deterrent fewer than one
crime in five is solved but there was
once a time when a better deterrent to
crime existed than fear of arrest it was
a fear of scorn even more perhaps the
loss of self-respect that accounted far
more than fear of lawmen for the potency
of the law that sense of community of
the duty that each citizen of his fellow
citizens seems to be evaporating in
America today a social cannibalism is
emerging in its place
we are beginning to feed on each other
we are taking rather than giving
selfishness is displacing scruples about
the common good
thus a disintegrating force has been set
loose in our society and since the law
is the mortar binding us together it is
inevitable that such a degeneration
should manifest itself in a growing
contempt for the law in all corners of
our country throughout our society the
rule of law threatens to be supplanted
by the unfettered pursuit of
self-interest this feeds a spreading
Anarchy which takes on many different
forms by no means limited to rampant
crime in the streets it reaches into the
workshops of our land the longshoremen
refuse to load wheat sold to Russia
their refusal has nothing to do with
wages or working conditions but rather
with their opposition to the sale the
law is disregarded by refusing to load
the grain the union displaces the
government and usurps to itself the
right to determine trade policy our
teachers union defies a court order
against the strike rather than taking an
appeal to a higher court what do those
teachers now tell the children who find
given laws personally inconvenient last
month the police in San Francisco
abandoned their City to crime staged an
illegal strike and ignored court orders
while packing pistols on the picket line
if the police can defy public order then
surely the army is next no society can
long endure strikes against the public
health and the public safety
but lest there be any thought that
public employees are alone in flaunting
the law we have only to look to the
boardrooms of our largest corporations
for the past two years as a matter of
fact I have been peering into those
boardrooms as part of an inquiry being
conducted by my Subcommittee on
multinational corporations this is what
we have found ITT secretly offering the
CIA a million dollars to prevent a yen
day lawfully elected by the people of
Chile from becoming president like the
longshoremen refusing to load wheat this
giant corporation sought to usurp for
itself the right to determine the course
of American foreign policy Exxon
parceling of 27 million dollars in
political contributions in Italy in
return for economic favors from the
government Gulf oil doling out four
million dollars in illegal corporate
contributions in Korea Northrop paying
an agent four hundred and fifty thousand
dollars for the purpose of bribing Saudi
Arabian general United Fruit slippin the
president of Honduras 1.2 million
dollars to lower the export tax on
banana rocky admitting illegal payments
to government officials in countries
around the globe in Europe in Asia in
the Middle East and in the Far East
amounting in the aggregate to many
millions of dollars all of this
wrongdoing is acknowledged by
straight-faced executives who say that
they had to break the law in order to
get the business where our profits were
to be made
propriety mattered not the excuse after
all is written plainly in the adage When
in Rome
but the excuse is hollow the bad habits
of Rome were brought home to America the
roster of companies that made illegal
corporate contributions to the Nixon
campaign in 1972 includes such
luminaries as American Airlines the 3m
company Northrop and Gulf and the list
has only commenced to be exposed perhaps
the most depressing aspect of this
corporate lawlessness is that it is
authorized at the highest executive
levels these corrupt practices are not
aberrations engineered by underling they
are company policy contempt for the law
has come to preside in the boardrooms of
our largest corporations I saw a little
cartoon that Illustrated this very well
the other day it showed one of those
typical big boardrooms with all the
directors around the great mahogany
table and the chairman of the board had
reached over and picked up the telephone
and he was leaning on his elbow and
speaking into the telephone and he was
saying this Jones Miss Jones would you
send somebody in here who can tell the
difference between right and wrong well
I would like to think but the high fever
point of our national affliction or
demeaning the law came a year ago with
the resignation of Richard Nixon proof
of the illegal and unethical conduct of
the nation's chief executive finally
forced him out of office a step ahead of
impeachment the lesson of that painful
ordeal is that if we are to restore
respect for the law to a position of
primacy in our society we will have to
begin at the top
within the federal government the place
to start is with the keepers of the law
those agencies charged with law
enforcement and secret intelligence
activities or if they won't respect the
law
then who will the investigation of these
agencies the CIA and the FBI by the
Senate committee I chair came about as a
result of widespread charges of unlawful
conduct and wrongdoing we know now that
the CIA has toyed with murder abroad in
league with the Mafia no less
the FBI has admitted to a whole series
of infractions unrelated to law
enforcement but directed instead toward
the harassment of law-abiding citizens
justice Louis Brandeis once wrote
decency security and liberty alike
demand that government officials shall
be subjected to the same rules of
conduct that are commands to the citizen
in a government of law existence of the
government will be imperiled if it fails
to observe the law scrupulously our
government is the potent omnipresent
teacher for good or ill it teaches the
whole people by it's exam
happily such wisdom is not the sole
province of learning jurist just a few
days ago I was up near a little cabin we
keep in Pennsylvania talking to a
Pennsylvania Dutch chicken farmer he
approached me and asked me if it were
true that the CIA had worked with the
Mafia and when I told him yes yes that
it was true he looked down at the ground
and he pushed the dirt with his foot and
he waited a spell and then he said to me
senator how will I ever teach my
children to grow up honest when the
government itself
traffic's with the underworld
it is the such matters that the Senate
Intelligence Committee must deal the
scope of our inquiry range is far beyond
attempted assassinations abroad indeed
the whole sorted subject of murder plots
form no part of the committee's original
mission it was dropped in our laps when
the Rockefeller Commission ducked it in
President Ford passed it on to us to
deal with since then the committee has
taken over 8,000 pages of testimony
interrogated nearly a hundred witnesses
examined a vast array of documents and
compiled a record on assassination alone
that compares in size to the entire
investigation of the Senate Watergate
committee all of this work has been
conducted in executive session behind
closed doors but the committee intends
to publish a full and detailed report of
its findings later this month when the
committee goes into open hearings we
will focus on unlawful conduct but the
CIA and the FBI as directed against
law-abiding American citizens I don't
know whether Big Brother government
waits for us as we enter the third
century of our Republic
Big Brother may still be the fictional
figment of an Orwellian imagination but
the electronic hardware to sustain his
rule exists in the American government
today it has already been invented
it has been built and it is in use in
the need to know what foreign
governments some of them potential
enemies are doing our own government has
projected an awesome technology that
enables us not only to spy from the sky
but also to monitor the messages that
course through the air we have in place
we have functioning the capability to
eavesdrop on messages between ships at
sea between planes in the air and
military units in the field we possess
an amazing capacity to intercept
messages of every time whether
governmental or commercial military or
civilian public or private wherever they
are transmitted through the atmosphere
the issue is how to keep that capacity
outward reaching in the service of our
legitimate national security needs or
even forever turned around no American
would have any privacy left such is the
government's potential for monitoring
any telephone conversation any telegram
any unguarded conversation there would
in a word be no place left to hide if an
American president ever aspired to
dictatorship the existing technology of
the federal intelligence agencies could
place in his hand the means to impose
near absolute surveillance the most
careful effort to combine together and
resistance no matter how discreetly
undertaken would be within the reach of
the tyrant to know such as the sweep of
this technology that is why the Senate
authorized this investigation that is
why I accepted its chairmanship and why
this has been the most disturbing
assignment of my career I know firsthand
the wartime worth of intelligence
gathering because I served in the
military intelligence of the young army
officer in World War two today as a
senior member of the Foreign Relations
Committee I am fully aware of the great
value of good intelligence in times of
peace
but the maintenance of such agencies
poses a dilemma for a free society they
must function in the most delicate of
all well mandated to maintain security
without impairing freedom if they engage
in wrongdoing
it is not a casual matter that could be
safely swept under the rug if the charge
is raised in the press which gave rise
to this investigation should prove
largely true then it is urgent that we
learn in time if they prove largely
false then the investigation will serve
to redeem the reputation of prestigious
agencies which find their honor in
upholding the law in keeping these
agencies under control we act not only
for ourselves a great champion of
freedom once remarked on whom else we
must think of let us contemplate our
forefathers and our posterity he said
and resolved to maintain the rights
bequeathed to us from the former for the
sake of the latter let us remember that
if we suffer tamely a lawless attack
upon our Liberty we encourage it and
involve others in our doom it is a very
serious condition that millions yet
unborn may be the miserable sharers of
the event that man was Samuel Adams at
the time his words were uttered we were
in this room some of the millions yet
unborn to be shielded from assaults on
Liberty and as we contemplate our own
forefathers and our own austerity we
must also maintain the rights bequeathed
to us from the former for the sake of
the life
with this investigation we strive to
safeguard not just ourselves but the
millions yet unborn but even if we do
the job well as I hope we will even if
we establish a successful oversight the
committee's work is merely the beginning
of the nation's task once we have
required the law keepers to set a sound
example for obeying and upholding the
law we must pull ourselves together as a
people and re-establish a general
respect for the law at every level if we
fail to do that then creeping anarchy
will gradually replace the rule of law
altogether and its wake will surely come
with the repressive measures that a
frightened people will then find
preferable there can be no successful
preservation of Liberty without the
preservation of the law the foremost
example of lawful conduct must come from
the top but a proper regard for the law
must be regenerated throughout in the
treatment of one citizen by another in
the self-discipline exercised by our
great unions and in the lofty centers of
corporate power Adlai Stevenson as
civilized the man has ever sought the
presidency tried to warn us as citizens
of this democracy he said you are the
rulers and the ruled the law givers and
the law-abiding the beginning and the
end
I know Adlai Stevenson would agree but
if we don't regain our respect for the
law and for each other
that our generation will be in this our
200th year not merely the end of a great
beginning but the beginning of the end
thank you very much